Morocco 2026

chapters

politics
geography
economy

cities//chapters

tangier
chebchachuga
fez
meknes
rabat
casablanca
marakesh



Tangier xx

chebchachuga xx

Fez
the 3 largast by some measure and the starting point of our journey. after exam phase as a reward directly after enjoying on drink with my robotics mates we took the relaed flight the next day from barcelona to fez morroco. a please of only having costed 17 eurps. plus additional 25 for 10 kg carry on. the flights were a christmas gift for nina. weatehr at that point was troublesome as both hamburg and munich were overflowing with snow. barclona not snowly but same amount of percepetation , only raining the entire last week of exam phase in tune with the emotional state of exhausting long days in teh library. packing and planning for morroco classed the idea of snoew rain and winter with the expectiation for surfing, desert camels. langing in fez airport we were ready mentayly fro both snow and desert heat, howerv uopon the feet tounchin g ground of afcrica for the first time in our lives a mild not warm not cold not dry not humid air greeted us. the expectations of lions chasing a herd of buffalo an dzebras or majestic snow covered peaks of the atlas or canyon like structures. was dissapointed and replaced by a concrete runway surrounded by flat green fields. in the end as already learnign in jounrey to south america also on this continetn the world just works the same. however what in fact did not work the same was our journey from the airport to city center fez. just outsdie the termial on a roundabout we waited for the bus. as one had just past we expected to enjoy an hour long wait hwer the line 16 didnt wait long. while we didnt need to wait long for the bus the people behind us longing to just enter the bus after a plane journey needed to show patience as we learned the harsh way that busses in fact did not accepts credit cards. thankfully the kind drever allowed us to pay with euros which shire would have been nice if we were competent enough to actually bring any euros with us. after paniked exchanged looks having looked through every pocket twice we did find the 10 diram needed for the journey in the hands and smile of a kind long beared stranger. and so the journey 2026 morocco was off to a bumby ride. driving into fez we wathec as majestic new and modern houses boarede their fences with ruins, both forgotten and abandeoned homes as well als dreams of unfinihsed dreams bau ruinen. the beared saviour greeted us afterwards with fluent german. we didnt exchange many words with him but two of the 3m sentences he spoke were that the capitalistic terror this place not reached yet but noone can escape the daunting technology tyranee. with this positve outlook he gave us one more helping hand in asking in the bus/packet/office where the closest bank would be. even as we were prepared and bought individual esims (also in hindsight not necessary as three differetn local sim privders were directly after the passport check, /sepereate provider as learned from previous experiece in huntsville) the map showed up empty for ATM. where gmaps was clueless the CTM worker jsut asvised us to an orange bank locaiton 50 meters next door. as seasoned extedned travels thoruhg noethers easters europe south america have made me, one situation porrfs to make me nervous which is the direct moment of withdrawign money from an atm. i mean in my mind if i would want to rob someone id longer on some corenre of view of an atm and then next street i know excacyl they will have a heafty sum of cash on them. so yeah that sutuation makes me nervous. as in colombia we withdrew awlays the maximum to safe moeny on withdrawles as they were one time payment no mater how much u withdraw, i just instictly clicked th ehighest amount which then deducted 750 eureos 8090 MAK driarma from my account. a phenomoal only payment to the atm of just 90 diram/ 8000 but this then suddenly 750 euros. with a watfull of cash we were hten able to order us an indrive driver to take us above the hill to our first riad located on the only main road leading into the medina of fez. different to other cities that grow radiaclly around their inner original city oldt town center. the medina of fez is secluded on the otehr side of a hill split formt he new 1 miillion or so city. LIna our kind host of the first riad greetied us to our edeight in understandable neglish, after all except the beared savous only repsonded with confusion to our english, spanhish, german, gebrabel. At the first interaction with lina just showed how planlos we arived as our answers to all quastions weer a simling and vorfreudiges.schulterzucken. how long do you wan tto stay in fey? yo no se. Why are you in fez? no se... what do u want to see in fez? no se. with the blank slate of of our days plans offered to lina, she filled the canvas with a map of sights to see in the medina. the medina is split into two halfs, the andlausia sight which i will forward the question to u is names andlusia becaaauuuuse? we we didnt know that in fact in came frmot he spanish andalusian peopole settling here. all relevant things on this sight included one mossk and nothing else as she kindly put. the fancier worthy buidligns were int he other side of the mdeina. on the map she pointed the library, mosk, royal garden and XX... with ponts and psots of sight dotting the plan, what was missing was only the connecting between them. A tasks simple enough for my seasonsed traveling self. even linas advise on hiring a guide as its a bit complciated were not seen as advice but more as a challede that my seasons traveling self wouldnt even phase. the riad / guesthuose iteflst stood in harhes contrast to he wet, sad, broken, old buidlign. as just behin dhte brokenden fassed greetied us colorull tiles, in a huge roofed couryard. the colours and patters of the tiles and doors and window seams that schmuckten every orner and cranny would be the dream of my small stone glitzer collecting 5 year old self. the small child came to surface at the marvolous artwork. apperently the 2o meter high ceilingof hte open courtayrd competetd with the staircase about hte space in the house and it wasnt even close fght, davig agaist goliath style fight howerve wehre goloth triumphs an david here the stairs wehre only shown mercy in form of at least being alowed to exist in the smae viscity to the majestic couryrads. the staircase being so narrow, flat, verwinkelt. die treppen hochkrakelzn as mounting the k2 mountainpass arriving at the same breathtaking view as the mountain peak or here a 360 rooftop terrace. we didnt enjow the view long as it was rainging. knowing what would expect us the next d<ys we would have praied for the nisel to bless us. as we didnt look into the futrue we instead looked to quickly get us cuddled up into the bed. before dosing of for a minute. we accepted linas offer of local quisine. first time trying tajin. served in a clay pot, chicken and the other option meatballs in blubernders brühe soauce,. incredible presntation, incredible taste and incdredible not served with a side. well our german heartts didnt count the bread as side and while enjoing the incredibe meatball/chicken we kind of contued to hope she owuld bring rcie or potateos or couscos but to no awail.  on note of the prsentaiotn incdreibel smell, sound thanks to the still cooking and bluberned, adn colours. deep red of the suace soring the meatbass,c deep sunset orange of the egg yolk, drawing inpsriation to mussaka, yellow spring leman of the chicken. black green and red olives, which turns out i am not yet mature enough to enjow the taste but do very much enjoy theri colours. the colours amazed my eyes as if one showed colours to a colorblind person the first time. the only tthing close to the sturation of colour were the bright flashing in iregular beat led stips above the doorway. hanking on by a thrat sagicking  ionly hoped the universe agreed with my judgment and would pull them dont ending theri snd my misery looking. for now hower the universe had other plans for the leds and instead decided for us and the leds to part ways and send us to our room. cuddlin guo ofr onely 1 hour we promised to only collect enrgy to then go for a night stroll. this ended as one could imagine. cuddled up with the AC turned to rivaling ht edesert heat, for which we cam eher for. afzer acceptign this evenign would nt be spent with us outside we could offer as exchange to leave our food outside. while nina figured out the rubicscube of a shower i went to bring the food upstairs. witht he bananabread safe and sound in the glassbox i was ony faced with the dilema of yesterdays airfired chicken brest in alluminum foil. ...... the cameras on the terrace could then watch me devour this dry chicken breast for a solid 15 miuntes. it gave me little joy. i hope lina watching the cctvs. had a better time watching em then i had. retungin to our room i wondered if i had taken the rwrong turn and as i somehow ended up in a rainforest environmet of humid 35 degrees. nina in the time i fought the dry chicken down firgured out booooth the AC and the shower. totgeht in tune they trasnfroemd the room into a rainforest ecophere. cant blame her though as also my hand was first degree burned as soon as i turned on the shower. after the calming brewign shower were i steamed like broccoli in a dampfgarrer we cuddled u oi n bed. enjoying just the feeling of for the first time in a long while of not having anythignt to do, no deadlines, no exams, no appoinments, no alarm in th emorning, no nothing just piece and the vorfruede of three amazing memory filled weeks in africas nothern western most place. this slow coming relaxation allowed to first flurish as it allowed me to open the kindle th efirst time and reading a spanish story about the kind of th ejungle lion and his relationship to nature, other animalsand to humans. thinlg about our nice ime blessde me with an icredibly 12 hours of sleep. this is in fac to rethorical stly ebut an actual 12 solid hours of sleep. the feeling i felt waking up at 8 am knowlingy without any sort of sorrow trunign around and lettingmysefl rest another 4 slumber of 4 hours is the pureest form of relaxation that there is. 


